# Introduction to Hand Analysis

Map analysis is still a large part of what a meteorologist does every
single day. This larger concept of "map analysis" includes the drawing
of contours of temperature, pressure, and height as well as analyzing
fronts, troughs, ridges, etc. The guidelines contained in this chapter
are a compilation of good rules of thumb and techniques for identifying 
many different meteorological phenomena on weather maps. You may not
always physically draw out the contours or analyze fronts, but you will
always need to be able to identify all of the different aspects of the
weather to be able to conduct a weather discussion or doing research.
Therefore, developing the skills of map analysis will serve you well
throughout your meteorological career.

This set of guidelines will start with a description of hand analysis
(e.g., the drawing of contours) on surface and upper-air weather maps.
Then the discussion will turn to analyzing maps that are already
contoured with the basic parameters, whether hand or computer drawn.

This chapter provides you with an introduction to the methods of
synoptic map analysis. It is by no means an all-inclusive guide, but
serves as a good outline on the proper techniques of analysis. You will
be expected to refer to this information for general synoptic analysis
techniques throughout your career.

## Tools

There are a number of tools that are useful for conducting a successful
hand analysis.
* Pencil
* Fine tip pens (black, blue, green, red, yellow, brown, purple, and orange)
* Colored pencils (blue, brown, green, red, purple, yellow)
   * including multiple shades of blue, green
* Good eraser
* Lots of patience

## General Tip

The most important thing to remember when analyzing maps is that it
requires **<u>time</u>** to do a good job. You are contouring values in
a fluid; actual values may change quickly, but the gradient of values
change more gradually.
