# Skew-T Log-p Description

In the meteorological field, the two most important thermodynamic
diagrams are the psuedoadiabatic diagram (also known as a St체ve diagram)
and the skew-T/log-P diagram. In this chapter we will focus on the skew-T/log-P
diagram. In practice, this diagram is the most widely used thermodynamic
diagram in the meteorological discipline.

Similar to surface observations, upper-air observations are encoded into
a special format before being transmitted. Historically these radiosonde
data were transmitted in three major blocks: TTAA, TTBB, and PPBB. Each
of these three blocks has its own significance. TTAA refers to data on
the mandatory levels, TTBB refers to data on significant thermodynamic
levels, and PPBB refers to significant wind levels. Now they come across
in a binary (computer encoded) format. We'll focus on plotting the
vertical profile of the atmosphere that we obtain through the use of
radiosondes.

In the Skew-T/Log-p diagram, the logarithm of pressure is used as the
vertical (y) axis, with larger values at the bottom. The brown
horizontal lines are constant pressure surfaces in units of millibars.

The brown solid lines that tilt toward the upper right are isotherms in
째C. Equal distances along the x-axis represent equal differences in
temperature, increasing from left to right along the axis. However, the
isotherms are tilted toward the upper right rather than running
perpendicular to the x-axis. This is why the term "skew" is associated
with temperature.

The green dashed lines that tilt with a greater slope to the upper-right
are lines of constant mixing ratio in grams of water vapor per kilogram
of air. Instead of mixing ratio, some thermodynamic diagrams plot other
moisture variables, such as specific humidity. However, in practice, no
matter what variable is plotted, the overall meaning and interpretation
is the same.

The red solid lines that are oriented perpendicular (or almost
perpendicular) to the isotherms are isentropic surfaces, or lines of
constant potential temperature in 째C. The values of the isentropic
surfaces are the same as the temperature lines at 1000 mb. These lines
are also known as dry adiabats.

The green curved lines are lines of constant equivalent potential
temperature in 째C, and are known as pseudoadiabats or moist adiabats.
There values are also determined from the temperature at 1000 mb.

```{figure} ../../images/annotated_skewT.png
:alt: Annotated skewT diagram
:width: 750px
:align: center
:name: annotatedskewt

This is an annotated skew-T log-p diagram identifying the important lines
that compose the chart.
```

## Plotting on SkewTs
Temperature and dew-point temperature are plotted relative to pressure.
For a given pressure level, a temperature and dew-point temperature are
plotted separately and a line is drawn for both variables that connect
the values between reported pressure levels.

The mixing ratio ($r$) can be obtained at a given level by interpolating
which mixing ratio isopleth intersects the point at which the dew point
temperature is plotted.

The saturation mixing ($r_s$) ratio can be obtained at a given level by
interpolating which mixing ratio isopleth intersects the point at which
the temperature is plotted.