# Sounding attributes

The tropopause is found where there is a distinct change from a positive
lapse rate (temperature *decreasing* with height) in the troposphere to
a negative lapse rate (temperature *increasing* with height) in the
stratosphere. This distinction is not always clear. In general, the
height of the tropopause is greater in low latitudes than it is in high
latitudes. This is a result of the hypsometric equation, which states
mathematically that the thickness of a layer of atmosphere is a function
of the average virtual temperature of that layer.

There sometimes are layers below the tropopause where temperatures
increase with height in a shallow layer; these are called a temperature
"inversion" or simply "inversion". These inversions can be caused by
frontal passages, overnight cooling at the surface, or the result of
sinking air (*subsidence*). Often accompanying the increase in
temperature with height is usually a sharp decrease in dew-point
temperature with height, when this happens the inversion is a result of
subsidence (sinking), which is a drying process.

The vertical profile of wind speed and direction can be important in
atmospheric stability assessment. Winds that are changing direction
counterclockwise with height are known as *backing winds*, while those
that are changing direction clockwise with height are known as *veering
winds*. Backing winds are associated with cold air advection, which
tends to promote sinking motion. While, veering winds are associated
with warm air advection, which tends to promote rising motion.

## Mandatory and Significant Levels

The data collected by the radiosonde is encoded for mandatory and
significant levels only, even though the instruments are continuously
measuring data during the radiosonde flight.

The mandatory levels are: 1000, 925, 850, 700, 500, 400, 300, 250, 200,
150, 100, 70, 50, and 10 (all in mb)

These do not change. Data are always reported from these pressure
levels. Significant levels are altitudes where sensors detect a rapid
change in the vertical profile of temperature and/or dew-point
temperature. The additional handout today is a sampling of decoded data
from our recent balloon launch