# Life Cycle of Mid-Latitude Cyclones

## Introduction

Before the publication of {cite:t}`bjerknes_solberg_1922`, the
meteorological lexicon did not have cold or warm fronts, or the idea
that mid-latitude cyclones evolved through a life cycle. In many
different scientific disciplines one can learn about the life cycle of
cells, animals, stars, etc. This advancement in meteorological knowledge
did not come out of nowhere. Throughout the latter parts of the 19^th^
century and the beginning of the 20^th^, many meteorological researchers
were slowly modifying the way we view the atmosphere, but it was the
work of the Bergen School that solidified this evolving view.

The revelation that all mid-latitude cyclones were moving and evolving
through a roughly structured life cycle had large ramifications for
forecasting. With the advent of the life cycle of cyclones one could use
that life cycle to predict how the low-pressure system would change
based on its current state. While we have progressed and modified the
simple life cycle presented in 1923, the foundations of using maps to
understand how weather patterns evolved have only grown with time. This
lab handout will build upon the ideas of {cite:t}`bjerknes_solberg_1922` to
develop a complete basic conceptual model of the life cycle of
mid-latitude cyclones.

## Life Cycle of Cyclones

In the time since the Bergen School published the first theories of
cyclone life cycles, meteorologists have learned that it is vitally
important to understand the evolution of the upper-air pattern in
association with the mean sea-level pressure pattern. We will start with
understanding the evolution of the characteristics of surface values of
temperature and mean sea-level pressure and its association with a
500-hPa trough.