# Cyclone Tracks

The track of a cyclone is very important as the exact track can make or
break a forecast of precipitation. For example, a very powerful
mid-latitude cyclone moved up the East coast of the U.S. in March of 1993.
Three different weather models had three different tracks and the
forecasters had to pick one to determine their forecast. They chose the
path that went along the coast, and the storm followed that track. This
storm is now known as the Storm of the Century. Had the storm tracked
more inland or went further out into the Atlantic Ocean; the storm would
not have had the same impact across the U.S., placing the precipitation
either more inland or further out to sea.

There are three to four primary tracks of mid-latitude cyclones across
the continental U.S. This is not to say that all mid-latitude cyclones
will follow only these tracks, but that most cyclones originate and
travel well-defined corridors across the country. The three primary
tracks are: Alberta cyclones, Denver (Hooker) Cyclones, and East Coast
Cyclones ({numref}`Fig. %s <cyclonetracks>`).

```{figure} ../../images/cyclone_tracks.png
:alt: Mid-latitude cyclone tracks
:width: 650px
:align: center
:name: cyclonetracks

Dominant cyclone tracks across the continental U.S. for
typical winter patterns.
```

So, what's in a track?

The track that a cyclone takes is the first opportunity you have to
determine what type of weather a particular area will have as a cyclone
moves through. If the track of the center of the storm is going to the
north of your location, then at some point that location will be in the
warm sector of the storm. This will obviously affect any temperature
forecast for the area, but it will likely also play in your
precipitation forecast.

## Snowstorms

For a location to experience a strong snowstorm, the track of the
surface low must be to the *south* (but not too far south). For the
Valparaiso area, the storm track most likely to allow for a substantial
synoptic snowfall would be the Denver cyclone track. This track will
typically ingest a lot of moisture from the Gulf of Mexico region,
transport it northward and if the cyclone tracks to our south, then we
are in the prime territory for snowfall. However, if the track goes
through Chicago, then Valparaiso will get into the warm sector and have
rainfall as our primary precipitation. Our only hope for snow would be
after the cold front passes and the area is under any wrap around
precipitation.

### *Alberta Cyclone*

Alberta cyclones are generally harbingers of cold to extremely cold air
for the upper-Midwest. They can bring snow, although snowfall totals are
generally small due to a lack of sufficient moisture and very cold
temperatures associated with the cyclone. These storms can produce very
strong pressure gradients and thus very strong winds.

### *Denver Cyclone*

This is our most likely heavy snow-producing storm. Although the track
will tell the tale, if a given location is 100--200 km north of the
cyclone track, then it will be in position to receive snowfall. If a
location falls to the south of the forecast cyclone track, then any
snowfall will likely be minimal.

### *East Coast or Gulf Coast Cyclones*

If these cyclones track directly along the coast, they will have an
ample supply of moisture that will feed into the storm. Depending on the
time of year and exact temperature structure, there may or may not be
substantial snow associated with this cyclone. Strongest precipitation
is often along the cold front or within 100--200 km of the track of the
cyclone (on the poleward side). Gulf coast and East coast cyclones
generally do not give any precipitation to the upper-Midwest region;
however, cold air will usually come into the region with a strong
cyclone following these tracks.