# MetPy Introduction

## Meteorological Python

MetPy is a Python module that contains domain specific functionality
(e.g., plotting surface observations in the above describe station model
format) for use in the Python programming language. This is a relatively
new module and has just recently passed its 1.0 version (meaning it has
reached at least a base-level of maturity). Throughout learning how to
use MetPy you will be introduced to some of the basics of the Python
programming language, but this is not strictly a course that will teach
you Python. Primarily you'll use the declarative syntax from MetPy to
plot various types of meteorological observations and model output.
Remember that whatever you tell Python to do in your code, whether it
was what you intended or not, is what it is going to do! So be sure to
check what you have typed in -- if you are not getting a map that you
think you should be getting (or get an error), it is most likely a human
input error (an i-d-10-t error, as they say).

*Important Notes (before we get started):*

MetPy Website: <https://unidata.github.io/MetPy/latest/index.html>

This website has all the documentation for the current version of MetPy.
You will only be introduced to what small bits of MetPy can do here
today; the reference guide will go into more detail about all of the
different aspects of the module that can be used to plot observational
data and model output.

OR

There will be ways to get some of the help information from the
development environment you will use throughout the semester (jupyter
notebooks). More on that as we go along!

As a **last resort** you can always ask someone who has a more
experience using Python, Jupyter notebooks/lab, and MetPy, as they will
probably have seen and dealt with many of the problems that you might be
having.